# COMMENTS FOR THE AUTHOR

## EDITOR

Thanks for your submitting to the SUST journal. This paper addressed the key
societal and ecological factors of market integration of indigenous local
community of Mexico, and found the critical role of local water resources and
impacts on socio-ecological systems of this area. The reviewers gave us many
informative comments, so please address them and upgrade your article.

### MAJOR COMMENTS

1.  The abstract has a little shortfall compared with the richness of the body.
    Please especially enrich the methodology, result, and discussion parts.
2.  the current Introduction includes some component of methodology (GLM and
    model variables) as the reviewer #2 says. Please restructure the story line
    of Introduction by referring some comments of the reviewer #1. And in the
    last paragraph of Introduction please explicitly state the research
    questions, not methodological advantages in the current manuscript.
3.  the current result table1 is too small for readers. Please add the full
    statistical tables in the supplementary B 5.1 section. It is not so annoying
    but gives rich information to the readers. Additionally, It looks that the
    analysis of "land secure" factor disappeared somewhere in the manuscript.
    Please enhance the description of land fragmentation part.
4.  Both of the reviewers recommended to introduce additional references in
    Discussion part. Please recheck that Discussion contains the unconscious
    assumptions or conclusion without evidences.

### MINOR COMMENTS

1.  Can you show some photo of the landscape of the target regions to help the
    SUST readers understanding if possible?
2.  Please add some references of "Djikstra's algorithm" and "Tobler's Law" and
    other concepts without references if contained.

## REVIEWER 1

This is a very interesting article, asking very interesting questions. The study
of the factors that affect or, rather, modulate market integration in
small-scale societies and their ecological consequences, is a fascinating field
of research. In this case the authors are interrogating the impact of two key
factors: proximity to surficial water and proximity to actual urban markets.

A few questions:

The beginning of the article (including the abstract) seems to emphasize that
these are "traditional communities still engaged in a largely subsistence-based
economy". Very quickly, however, we run into descriptions that "perhaps"
question this "largely subsistence-based economy": road connected, salaried
work, work in town, they own appliances... At some point one gets the feeling
that this subsistence-based economy initial image is more a straw-man narrative
artifact than a reality. In fact, one of the main contributions of "peasants'"
literature to the analysis of the rural (incidentally starting in Mexico as
well, with people like Redfield in the 60s and 70s), was their definition of
peasant communities not as isolated self-sufficient communities, but as
communities fairly well integrated, one way or another, into the socioeconomic
system of the neighbouring towns. Perhaps the article needs to justify better
why these communities are mostly subsistence based or give up this notion
altogether from the beginning, and accept that they are all connected to their
respective towns. Both options would be, of course acceptable. In any case, I do
not think the second option would diminish the interest of the research. It
would just change the starting premise.

I am a bit concerned about the use of springs (water availability) as a key
concept to understand location of communities. Water is indeed a key element for
all agro settlements, no question, but not all springs are the same. Some are
located in low lands, some in mountains, some in shady slopes, some in sunny
slopes,... and so on. Unless I missed something, the analysis has assumed that
all permanent springs were equally attractive to settlement. Is this a fair
assumption? If it is, why?

In page 6 land fragmentation is discussed as land security. The article could
offer more data about what secure property entails. One thing would be to have
property of the house, and another would be to have property of the house and of
all the needed pastures (plus a water source) to survive as an agriculturally
focused family. Owning a house without means of production might not generate a
lot of security, might force people into proletarization (landless workers
forced to work for others). If an ejido manages to keep the collective land
available to all houses (and their animals) that might generate (despite the
lack of private property) more land security (at a community level) than any
percentage of privatization. To summarize some data on the overall property
regime in these communities, might help to understand the points this section is
making.

I found the "Historical antecedents" section very interesting and useful. It
might be a good idea to move part of the information it contains towards the
beginning of the article. It might help the readers to understand what follows
(specially readers not familiar with the Mexican context).

At some point it is not clear how proximity to markets is evaluated. "Raw"
proximity is of course important (1 hour versus 2 hours or 3), but the potential
economies of scale of this mobility are important as well. In other words, a
hamlet might be objectively farther away than another from a town, but a better
road might allow for a form of transportation that includes large quantities of
goods, while the closer town is limited to smaller quantities. Is this "carrying
capacity" differential taken into account?

As the ecological part of the socioecological analysis (sections 4.3 and,
perhaps, 4.4) seem to be an afterthought of two pages, I wonder if this article
is about how market integration mediates human-environment interactions among
traditional ranchers, as announced by the title, or it is about the spatial
impact of urban markets on rural settlements.

This analysis considers only the two urban markets of the area as potential
poles of attraction (market integration wise). Many rural areas of Mexico have
"intermediate" markets. Some of the bigger villages might have street markets of
a certain local importance. This possibility is not considered here. Is this
network of markets (of different dimensions and often connected) also a part of
the Giganta range socioeconomic reality?

Additional points

In p. 3 the authors mention that market integration can make small-scale
communities more sensitive to climate change. I do not disagree, but perhaps it
is a statement that requires some explanation. Vulnerability associated to
specialization?

The assumption that streams have not changed during the studied period (p.6),
sounds like a big assumption in an arid environment. This type of environments
tend to have a non-negligible amount of ephemeral water sources (seasonal
creeks, streams that exist for a period after an extreme weather event,...).

This segment of the text "For instance, researchers have shown that market
integration within traditional agricultural communities involves a shift from
intensive to extensive kinship systems, or shifts from small kin networks with
higher degrees of relatedness to large kin networks with lower degrees of
relatedness (Peña, Alfonso-Sánchez, and Calderón 2002). This appears to be the
result of a decreasing reliance on consanguineous or close-kin marriage customs,
with families favouring expansive social networks over stronger family ties
within a market economy (Shenk et al. 2016)." I do not understand.

In conclusion this an interesting article grappling with interesting problems.
As mentioned in this review, it might need clarification on some of the main
conceptual choices. Revise and resubmit.

## REVIEWER 2:

1.  Overall Impression $$ 3 $$ poor 1 2 3 4 5 good

2.  Significance? $$x $$ Yes
    $$                                                                $$ No

3.  Originality?
    $$                                                                $$ Yes
    $$ x$$ No

4.  Relevance? (Within journal aims and scope) $$ v $$ Yes
    $$                                                                $$ No

5.  Presentation and organization?
    $$                                                                $$ Yes
    $$ x $$ No

6.  Adequate submission category? $$x $$ Yes
    $$                                                                $$ No

7.  Conclusion clear and adequate? Supported by evidence? $$ x $$ Yes
    $$                                                                $$ No

8.  Adequate literature review?
    $$                                                                $$ Yes
    $$ x $$ No

9.  Contains transdisciplinary features? $$ x $$ Yes
    $$                                                                $$ No

10. Comprehensible for experts in other fields?
    $$                                                                $$ Yes
    $$ x $$ No

The paper examines the market integration and availability of natural resources
(water) as determinants of settlement choices among subsistence farmers in Baja
California Sur, Mexico and analyzes the social and environmental implications of
such decisions. As several other studies conducted in developing countries, the
findings indicate that these kinds of households prefer settling near roads as
they facilitate access to urban areas (markets) but also close to natural
resources, which are generally an important part of their livelihoods. While the
empirical results are not surprising the analysis of the implications is
interesting and detailed. Please find below some comments and suggestions to
improve the paper. Introduction It is certainly too long (more than 4 pages).
Much of the information provided in this part belongs to the Methodology
section, where the description of the research area and the statistical methods
should be. Furthermore, the way in which this section is written narrows the
scope of the paper as it does not put into context the implications of the
problem for other regions of the world. Methodology This section should begin
with the description of the research area. While the statistical method utilized
are briefly described in the first paragraph of this section. This section
begins as if all readers (of a multidisciplinary journal) are familiar with both
the statistical methods and the variables. There are several aspects that should
be clarified. First, why choosing a GLS binomial over other standard procedures
(i.e., logit)? The specification and the functional forms of the models should
be provided and clearly defined and described, from the information provided I
am not aware of the actual specification that was used. Providing a Table with
the variables used, their definitions and descriptive statistics would be
helpful in this sense. Page 6, line 42 "Land fragmentation is here
operationalized as land security,.." Authors should argue for such a decision.
Land fragmentations does not necessarily has to do with land security, those are
totally different concepts. There is evidence of places suffering from land
fragmentation but that does not mean that they have land titles. Page 7 2.2
Travel time. While the description of the procedures to estimate travel time is
extensive, authors make a lot of assumptions in this part. In this sense,
authors should provide evidence that this procedure is standard and robust by
citing prior research using such methodology in similar studies.

Page 7, line 31. "Obviously, there will be exceptions to this, but ethnographic
observation does suggest that it is true in general for the rancheros in this
region" Observation by yours? Results I could not find Table 6, so I cannot make
any comment concerning the results of the regressions. "Co-vary" You mean it is
correlated? Page 9, line 49 "The model with an additive land security term
suggests that more secure ranch clusters have slightly smaller populations, but
the effect is non-significant ( = -0.114, p = 0.687)." Please address this
result considering my concern about proxying land fragmentation and lad titling.
Discussion Page 10, line 39. "In other words, water availability determines
where people live but not how many people live there. Instead, that is being
driven largely by markets, which pull people closer to the cities". I do not see
how both your results and your argumentation support this claim. Page 15, line
4. "springs in the depopulated hinterland away from roads are currently on the
rebound, with higher rates of endemism, and this in spite of the fact that
ranching continues in the region." There is evidence that market integration may
have positive outcomes on conservation as people have more off-farm
opportunities which leads to higher incomes and less time available for farming.
Although you do not include that variable in your analysis, please comment on
that.
